docs/usage.rst, before:

=====
Usage
=====

In order to use Yapconf in a project, you will first need to create your specification object.
There are lots of options for this object, so we'll just start with the basics. Check out the
`Item Arguments`_ section for all the options available to you. For now, let's just assume we
have the following specification defined

.. code-block:: python

    from yapconf import YapconfSpec

    my_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str'},
        'db_port': {'type': 'int'},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str'},
        'verbose': {'type': 'bool', 'default': True},
        'filename': {'type': 'str'},
    })

Now that you have a specification for your configuration, you can load your config from lots
of different places using ``load_config``. When using this method, it is significant the
order in which you pass your arguments as it sets the precedence for load order. Let's see
this in practice:

.. code-block:: python

    # Let's say you loaded this dict from the command-line (more on that later)
    cli_args = {'filename': '/path/to/config', 'db_name': 'db_from_cli'}

    # Also assume you have /some/config.yml that has the following:
    #   db_name: db_from_config_file
    #   db_port: 1234
    config_file = '/some/config.yml' # JSON is also supported!

    # Finally, let's assume you have the following set in your environment
    # DB_NAME="db_from_environment"
    # FILENAME="/some/default/config.yml"
    # DB_HOST="localhost"

    # You can load your config:
    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_args, config_file, 'ENVIRONMENT')


    # You now have a config object which can be accessed via attributes or keys:
    config.db_name # > db_from_cli
    config['db_port'] # > 1234
    config.db_host # > localhost
    config['verbose'] # > True
    config.filename # > /path/to/config

    # If you loaded in a different order, you'll get a different result
    config = my_spec.load_config('ENVIRONMENT', config_file, cli_args)
    config.db_name # > db_from_environment

This config object is powered by python-box_ which is a handy utility
for handling your config object. It behaves just like a dictionary and you can treat it as such!

Nested Items
------------
In a lot of cases, it makes sense to nest your configuration, for example, if we wanted to take all of our
database configuration and put it into a single dictionary, that would make a lot of sense. You would specify
this to yapconf as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    nested_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db': {
            'type': 'dict',
            'items': {
                'name': { 'type': 'str' },
                'port': { 'type': 'int' }
            }
        }
    })

    config = nested_spec.load_config({'db': {'name': 'db_name', 'port': 1234}})

    config.db.name # returns 'name'
    config.db.port # returns 1234
    config.db # returns the db dictionary


List Items
----------
List items are a special class of nested items which is only allowed to have a single item listed. It can
be specified as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    list_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'names': {
            'type': 'list',
            'items': {
                'name': {'type': 'str'}
            }
        }
    })

    config = list_spec.load_config({'names': ['a', 'b', 'c']})

    config.names # returns ['a', 'b', 'c']


Environment Loading
-------------------

If no ``env_name`` is specified for each item, then by default, Yapconf will automatically format the item's name
to be all upper-case and snake case. So the name ``foo_bar`` will become ``FOO_BAR`` and ``fooBar`` will become
``FOO_BAR``. If you do not want to apply this formatting, set ``format_env`` to ``False``. Loading ``list``
items and ``dict`` items from the environment is not supported and as such ``env_name`` s that are set for these
items will be ignored.

Often times, you will want to prefix environment variables with your application name or something else. You can
set an environment prefix on the ``YapconfSpec`` item via the ``env_prefix``:

.. code-block:: python

    import os

    env_spec = Specification({'foo': {'type': 'str'}}, 'MY_APP_')

    os.environ['FOO'] = 'not_namespaced'
    os.environ['MY_APP_FOO'] = 'namespaced_value'

    config = env_spec.load_config('ENVIRONMENT')

    config.foo # returns 'namespaced_value'


CLI Support
-----------
Yapconf has some great support for adding your configuration items as command-line arguments by utilizing
argparse_. Let's assume the ``my_spec`` object from the original example

.. code-block:: python

    import argparse

    my_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str'},
        'db_port': {'type': 'int'},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str'},
        'verbose': {'type': 'bool', 'default': True},
        'filename': {'type': 'str'},
    })

    parser = argparser.ArgumentParser()
    my_spec.add_arguments(parser)

    args = [
        '--db-name', 'db_name',
        '--db-port', '1234',
        '--db-host', 'localhost',
        '--no-verbose',
        '--filename', '/path/to/file'
    ]

    cli_values = vars(parser.parse_args(args))

    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_values)

    config.db_name # 'db_name'
    config.db_port # 1234
    config.db_host # 'localhost'
    config.verbose # False
    config.filename # '/path/to/file'

Yapconf makes adding CLI arguments very easy! If you don't want to expose something over the command line
you can set the ``cli_expose`` flag to ``False``.

Boolean Items and the CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Boolean items will add special flags to the command-line based on their defaults. If you have a default set to
``True`` then a ``--no-{item_name}`` flag will get added. If the default is ``False`` then a ``--{{item_name}}``
will get added as an argument. If no default is specified, then both will be added as mutually exclusive arguments.

Nested Items and the CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Yapconf even supports ``list`` and ``dict`` type items from the command-line:

.. code-block:: python

    import argparse

    spec = YapconfSpec({
        'names': {
            'type': 'list',
            'items': {
                'name': {'type': 'str'}
            }
        },
        'db': {
            'type': 'dict',
            'items': {
                'host': {'type': 'str'},
                'port': {'type': 'int'}
            },
        }
    })

    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()

    cli_args = [
        '--name', 'foo',
        '--name', 'bar',
        '--db-host', 'localhost',
        '--db-port', '1234',
        '--name', 'baz'
    ]

    cli_values = vars(parser.parse_args(args))

    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_values)

    config.names # ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
    config.db.host # 'localhost'
    config.db.port # 1234

Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^
There are a few limitations to how far down the rabbit-hole Yapconf is willing to go. Yapconf does not support
``list`` type items with either ``dict`` or ``list`` children. The reason is that it would be very cumbersome
to start specifying which items belong to which dictionaries and in which index in the list.


CLI/Environment Name Formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A quick note on formatting and ``yapconf``. Yapconf tries to create sensible ways to convert your config items
into "normal" environment variables and command-line arguments. In order to do this, we have to make some
assumptions about what "normal" environment variables and command-line arguments are.

By default, environment variables are assumed to be all upper-case, snake-case names. The item name ``foO_BaR``
would become ``FOO_BAR`` in the environment.

By default, command-line argument are assumed to be kebab-case. The item name ``foo_bar`` would become ``--foo-bar``

If you do not like this formatting, then you can turn it off by setting the ``format_env`` and ``format_cli`` flags.

Config Migration
----------------
Throughout the lifetime of an application it is common to want to move configuration around, changing both the
names of configuration items and the default values for each. Yapconf also makes this migration a breeze! Each
item has a ``previous_defaults`` and ``previous_names`` values that can be specified. These values help you
migrate previous versions of config files to newer versions. Let's see a basic example where we might want to
update a config file with a new default:

.. code-block:: python

    # Assume we have a JSON config file ('/path/to/config.json') like the following:
    # {"db_name": "test_db_name", "db_host": "1.2.3.4"}

    spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str', 'default': 'new_default', 'previous_defaults': ['test_db_name']},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str', 'previous_defaults': ['localhost']}
    })

    # We can migrate that file quite easily with the spec object:
    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config.json')

    # Will result in /path/to/config.json being overwritten:
    # {"db_name": "new_default", "db_host": "1.2.3.4"}

You can specify different output config files also:

.. code-block:: python

    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config.json',
                             output_file_name='/new/path/to/config.json')

There are many values you can pass to ``migrate_config_file``, by default it looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config',
                             always_update=False,    # Always update values (even if you set them to None)
                             current_file_type=None, # Used for transitioning between json and yaml config files
                             output_file_name=None,  # Will default to current file name
                             output_file_type=None,  # Used for transitioning between json and yaml config files
                             create=True,            # Create the file if it doesn't exist
                             update_defaults=True    # Update the defaults
                             )


YAML Support
------------
Yapconf knows how to output and read both ``json`` and ``yaml`` files. However, to keep the dependencies to a
minimum it does not come with ``yaml``. You will have to manually install either ``pyyaml`` or ``ruamel.yaml`` if
you want to use ``yaml``.

Item Arguments
--------------

For each item in a specification, you can set any of these keys:

+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Name              | Default          | Description                                                                                                    |
+===================+==================+================================================================================================================+
| name              | N/A              | The name of the config item                                                                                    |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| item_type         | ``'str'``        | The python type of the item ``('str', 'int', 'long', 'float', 'bool', 'complex', 'dict', 'list' )``            |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| default           | ``None``         | The default value for this item                                                                                |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| env_name          | ``name.upper()`` | The name to search in the environment                                                                          |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| description       | ``None``         | Description of the item                                                                                        |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| required          | ``True``         | Specifies if the item is required to exist                                                                     |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_short_name    | ``None``         | One-character command-line shortcut                                                                            |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_choices       | ``None``         | List of possible values for the item from the command-line                                                     |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| previous_names    | ``None``         | List of previous names an item had                                                                             |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| previous_defaults | ``None``         | List of previous defaults an item had                                                                          |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| items             | ``None``         | Nested item definition for use by ``list`` or ``dict`` type items                                              |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_expose        | ``True``         | Specifies if this item should be added to arguments on the command-line (nested ``list`` are always ``False``) |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| separator         | ``.``            | The separator to use for ``dict`` type items (useful for ``previous_names``)                                   |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bootstrap         | ``False``        | A flag that indicates this item needs to be loaded before others can be loaded                                 |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| format_env        | ``True``         | A flag to determine if environment variables will be all upper-case SNAKE_CASE.                                |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| format_cli        | ``True``         | A flag to determine if we should format the command-line arguments to be kebab-case.                           |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+


.. _python-box: https://github.com/cdgriffith/Box
.. _argparse: https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html

Commit message:

Environment names with prefixes #11 (#18)
* Environment names with prefixes #11

This change is to address #11. It introduces an apply_env_prefix
option and changes the default behavior. See the tests, docs or
issue for an example.

* Fixed formatting error on docs.

docs/usage.rst, after:

=====
Usage
=====

In order to use Yapconf in a project, you will first need to create your specification object.
There are lots of options for this object, so we'll just start with the basics. Check out the
`Item Arguments`_ section for all the options available to you. For now, let's just assume we
have the following specification defined

.. code-block:: python

    from yapconf import YapconfSpec

    my_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str'},
        'db_port': {'type': 'int'},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str'},
        'verbose': {'type': 'bool', 'default': True},
        'filename': {'type': 'str'},
    })

Now that you have a specification for your configuration, you can load your config from lots
of different places using ``load_config``. When using this method, it is significant the
order in which you pass your arguments as it sets the precedence for load order. Let's see
this in practice:

.. code-block:: python

    # Let's say you loaded this dict from the command-line (more on that later)
    cli_args = {'filename': '/path/to/config', 'db_name': 'db_from_cli'}

    # Also assume you have /some/config.yml that has the following:
    #   db_name: db_from_config_file
    #   db_port: 1234
    config_file = '/some/config.yml' # JSON is also supported!

    # Finally, let's assume you have the following set in your environment
    # DB_NAME="db_from_environment"
    # FILENAME="/some/default/config.yml"
    # DB_HOST="localhost"

    # You can load your config:
    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_args, config_file, 'ENVIRONMENT')


    # You now have a config object which can be accessed via attributes or keys:
    config.db_name # > db_from_cli
    config['db_port'] # > 1234
    config.db_host # > localhost
    config['verbose'] # > True
    config.filename # > /path/to/config

    # If you loaded in a different order, you'll get a different result
    config = my_spec.load_config('ENVIRONMENT', config_file, cli_args)
    config.db_name # > db_from_environment

This config object is powered by python-box_ which is a handy utility
for handling your config object. It behaves just like a dictionary and you can treat it as such!

Nested Items
------------
In a lot of cases, it makes sense to nest your configuration, for example, if we wanted to take all of our
database configuration and put it into a single dictionary, that would make a lot of sense. You would specify
this to yapconf as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    nested_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db': {
            'type': 'dict',
            'items': {
                'name': { 'type': 'str' },
                'port': { 'type': 'int' }
            }
        }
    })

    config = nested_spec.load_config({'db': {'name': 'db_name', 'port': 1234}})

    config.db.name # returns 'name'
    config.db.port # returns 1234
    config.db # returns the db dictionary


List Items
----------
List items are a special class of nested items which is only allowed to have a single item listed. It can
be specified as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    list_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'names': {
            'type': 'list',
            'items': {
                'name': {'type': 'str'}
            }
        }
    })

    config = list_spec.load_config({'names': ['a', 'b', 'c']})

    config.names # returns ['a', 'b', 'c']


Environment Loading
-------------------

If no ``env_name`` is specified for each item, then by default, Yapconf will automatically format the item's name
to be all upper-case and snake case. So the name ``foo_bar`` will become ``FOO_BAR`` and ``fooBar`` will become
``FOO_BAR``. If you do not want to apply this formatting, set ``format_env`` to ``False``. Loading ``list``
items and ``dict`` items from the environment is not supported and as such ``env_name`` s that are set for these
items will be ignored.

Often times, you will want to prefix environment variables with your application name or something else. You can
set an environment prefix on the ``YapconfSpec`` item via the ``env_prefix``:

.. code-block:: python

    import os

    env_spec = Specification({'foo': {'type': 'str'}}, 'MY_APP_')

    os.environ['FOO'] = 'not_namespaced'
    os.environ['MY_APP_FOO'] = 'namespaced_value'

    config = env_spec.load_config('ENVIRONMENT')

    config.foo # returns 'namespaced_value'


.. note:: When using an ``env_name`` with ``env_prefix`` the ``env_prefix`` will still be applied
    to the name you provided. If you want to avoid this behavior, set the ``apply_env_prefix`` to ``False``.

CLI Support
-----------
Yapconf has some great support for adding your configuration items as command-line arguments by utilizing
argparse_. Let's assume the ``my_spec`` object from the original example

.. code-block:: python

    import argparse

    my_spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str'},
        'db_port': {'type': 'int'},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str'},
        'verbose': {'type': 'bool', 'default': True},
        'filename': {'type': 'str'},
    })

    parser = argparser.ArgumentParser()
    my_spec.add_arguments(parser)

    args = [
        '--db-name', 'db_name',
        '--db-port', '1234',
        '--db-host', 'localhost',
        '--no-verbose',
        '--filename', '/path/to/file'
    ]

    cli_values = vars(parser.parse_args(args))

    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_values)

    config.db_name # 'db_name'
    config.db_port # 1234
    config.db_host # 'localhost'
    config.verbose # False
    config.filename # '/path/to/file'

Yapconf makes adding CLI arguments very easy! If you don't want to expose something over the command line
you can set the ``cli_expose`` flag to ``False``.

Boolean Items and the CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Boolean items will add special flags to the command-line based on their defaults. If you have a default set to
``True`` then a ``--no-{item_name}`` flag will get added. If the default is ``False`` then a ``--{{item_name}}``
will get added as an argument. If no default is specified, then both will be added as mutually exclusive arguments.

Nested Items and the CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Yapconf even supports ``list`` and ``dict`` type items from the command-line:

.. code-block:: python

    import argparse

    spec = YapconfSpec({
        'names': {
            'type': 'list',
            'items': {
                'name': {'type': 'str'}
            }
        },
        'db': {
            'type': 'dict',
            'items': {
                'host': {'type': 'str'},
                'port': {'type': 'int'}
            },
        }
    })

    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()

    cli_args = [
        '--name', 'foo',
        '--name', 'bar',
        '--db-host', 'localhost',
        '--db-port', '1234',
        '--name', 'baz'
    ]

    cli_values = vars(parser.parse_args(args))

    config = my_spec.load_config(cli_values)

    config.names # ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
    config.db.host # 'localhost'
    config.db.port # 1234

Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^
There are a few limitations to how far down the rabbit-hole Yapconf is willing to go. Yapconf does not support
``list`` type items with either ``dict`` or ``list`` children. The reason is that it would be very cumbersome
to start specifying which items belong to which dictionaries and in which index in the list.


CLI/Environment Name Formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A quick note on formatting and ``yapconf``. Yapconf tries to create sensible ways to convert your config items
into "normal" environment variables and command-line arguments. In order to do this, we have to make some
assumptions about what "normal" environment variables and command-line arguments are.

By default, environment variables are assumed to be all upper-case, snake-case names. The item name ``foO_BaR``
would become ``FOO_BAR`` in the environment.

By default, command-line argument are assumed to be kebab-case. The item name ``foo_bar`` would become ``--foo-bar``

If you do not like this formatting, then you can turn it off by setting the ``format_env`` and ``format_cli`` flags.

Config Migration
----------------
Throughout the lifetime of an application it is common to want to move configuration around, changing both the
names of configuration items and the default values for each. Yapconf also makes this migration a breeze! Each
item has a ``previous_defaults`` and ``previous_names`` values that can be specified. These values help you
migrate previous versions of config files to newer versions. Let's see a basic example where we might want to
update a config file with a new default:

.. code-block:: python

    # Assume we have a JSON config file ('/path/to/config.json') like the following:
    # {"db_name": "test_db_name", "db_host": "1.2.3.4"}

    spec = YapconfSpec({
        'db_name': {'type': 'str', 'default': 'new_default', 'previous_defaults': ['test_db_name']},
        'db_host': {'type': 'str', 'previous_defaults': ['localhost']}
    })

    # We can migrate that file quite easily with the spec object:
    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config.json')

    # Will result in /path/to/config.json being overwritten:
    # {"db_name": "new_default", "db_host": "1.2.3.4"}

You can specify different output config files also:

.. code-block:: python

    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config.json',
                             output_file_name='/new/path/to/config.json')

There are many values you can pass to ``migrate_config_file``, by default it looks like this:

.. code-block:: python

    spec.migrate_config_file('/path/to/config',
                             always_update=False,    # Always update values (even if you set them to None)
                             current_file_type=None, # Used for transitioning between json and yaml config files
                             output_file_name=None,  # Will default to current file name
                             output_file_type=None,  # Used for transitioning between json and yaml config files
                             create=True,            # Create the file if it doesn't exist
                             update_defaults=True    # Update the defaults
                             )


YAML Support
------------
Yapconf knows how to output and read both ``json`` and ``yaml`` files. However, to keep the dependencies to a
minimum it does not come with ``yaml``. You will have to manually install either ``pyyaml`` or ``ruamel.yaml`` if
you want to use ``yaml``.

Item Arguments
--------------

For each item in a specification, you can set any of these keys:

+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Name              | Default          | Description                                                                                                    |
+===================+==================+================================================================================================================+
| name              | N/A              | The name of the config item                                                                                    |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| item_type         | ``'str'``        | The python type of the item ``('str', 'int', 'long', 'float', 'bool', 'complex', 'dict', 'list' )``            |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| default           | ``None``         | The default value for this item                                                                                |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| env_name          | ``name.upper()`` | The name to search in the environment                                                                          |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| description       | ``None``         | Description of the item                                                                                        |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| required          | ``True``         | Specifies if the item is required to exist                                                                     |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_short_name    | ``None``         | One-character command-line shortcut                                                                            |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_choices       | ``None``         | List of possible values for the item from the command-line                                                     |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| previous_names    | ``None``         | List of previous names an item had                                                                             |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| previous_defaults | ``None``         | List of previous defaults an item had                                                                          |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| items             | ``None``         | Nested item definition for use by ``list`` or ``dict`` type items                                              |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cli_expose        | ``True``         | Specifies if this item should be added to arguments on the command-line (nested ``list`` are always ``False``) |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| separator         | ``.``            | The separator to use for ``dict`` type items (useful for ``previous_names``)                                   |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bootstrap         | ``False``        | A flag that indicates this item needs to be loaded before others can be loaded                                 |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| format_env        | ``True``         | A flag to determine if environment variables will be all upper-case SNAKE_CASE.                                |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| format_cli        | ``True``         | A flag to determine if we should format the command-line arguments to be kebab-case.                           |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| apply_env_prefix  | ``True``         | Apply the env_prefix even if the environment name was set manually. Ignored if ``format_env`` is ``False``     |
+-------------------+------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+


.. _python-box: https://github.com/cdgriffith/Box
.. _argparse: https://docs.python.org/3/library/argparse.html
